[Amit Varma]: How did Donald Trump win America?
[Amit Varma]: There are many explanations for this, all of which have some amount of truth to them,
[Amit Varma]: but cannot account for the entire truth on their own.
[Amit Varma]: One explanation is that America has many bigots and misogynists who were empowered by social
[Amit Varma]: media and exhilarated to find a candidate who validated their deepest instincts.
[Amit Varma]: Another explanation is that a vote for Trump was really a negative vote against the other
[Amit Varma]: side, against the ghastly Hillary Clinton and all those smug elite liberals.
[Amit Varma]: A third explanation, one that I wrote a column about, which is linked on this podcast page,
[Amit Varma]: is that Trump happened across a simple formula.
[Amit Varma]: Explain the complex problems of the people of America with simplistic solutions that
[Amit Varma]: sound intuitive and appeal to their instincts.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, he told simple, attractive stories.
[Amit Varma]: That Donald Trump is a bullshitter is true, but what you should keep in mind is that he
[Amit Varma]: did not win in spite of his bullshit, but because of it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I want to tackle one of the simple stories that Donald Trump told
[Amit Varma]: about jobs in America.
[Amit Varma]: Middle America had allegedly stagnated for decades and there was great worry about jobs.
[Amit Varma]: Now the reasons for these are complex, as are the solutions, but Trump chose to ignore
[Amit Varma]: what the truth might be and tell a simple story with two parts to it.
[Amit Varma]: Part one, your jobs are going because immigrants are coming and taking them.
[Amit Varma]: Part two, your jobs are being shipped overseas.
[Amit Varma]: With these two stories, he made immigration and outsourcing the villains.
[Amit Varma]: And these stories appeal to his audiences because, hey, it's a natural human tendency
[Amit Varma]: to find someone else to blame, some easy target, the other.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I want to talk about these two villains of his, immigration and outsourcing.
[Amit Varma]: My guest for this episode is a very dear friend of mine, Gaurav Sabnis.
[Amit Varma]: Gaurav and I have been friends since the early 2000s when we were both early bloggers.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a blog called India Uncut and Gaurav wrote a blog called Vantage Point.
[Amit Varma]: He was based in Mumbai then, but he now lives in New York, where he teaches marketing at
[Amit Varma]: the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken.
[Amit Varma]: I've always found Gaurav incredibly insightful on economics and politics.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, he outgeeks me on both those subjects, and I'm delighted that he's finally a guest
[Amit Varma]: on my show.
[Guest]: Gaurav, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Great to be on the show finally.
[Amit Varma]: Gaurav, before we get to talking about the specifics of immigration and outsourcing,
[Amit Varma]: I want to start off by asking you, was there really a jobs crisis in America?
[Guest]: Yeah, right.
[Guest]: And it's, it's one of these things that you can view from one side or the other side.
[Guest]: So if you look at it in terms of unemployment rates, right after the 2008 crash, the unemployment
[Guest]: rate did go up, but it never really crossed into like the Great Depression days or it
[Guest]: never crossed beyond I think something like 10 or 11%.
[Guest]: And by the time Trump became a candidate, it was down to about 5%.
[Guest]: So it was down to historic lows.
[Guest]: So there wasn't really a job crisis.
[Guest]: The perception about job crisis is more about underemployment and unemployment.
[Guest]: So people think that they should have a better job or people think that they should be getting
[Guest]: paid more.
[Guest]: But just objectively speaking, the rhetoric didn't gel with the reality, in my opinion.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, it's not that there weren't jobs to go around, but that the jobs that
[Amit Varma]: were there, people weren't happy with their salaries or the scope or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And especially you hear about small town America, where people felt that, you know, salaries
[Amit Varma]: hadn't gone up, relatively speaking for generations, and they didn't necessarily have better lives
[Amit Varma]: than their parents.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember David Remnick on his New Yorker podcast asked Bruce Springsteen about this.
[Amit Varma]: He asked Springsteen that, hey, all the small towns in America that you wrote all your great
[Amit Varma]: songs about voted for Trump.
[Amit Varma]: So what happened there?
[Amit Varma]: Why did that happen?
[Amit Varma]: And his answer was that, no, I mean, the problems were real and no one was paying attention
[Amit Varma]: to that.
[Amit Varma]: And Trump might have had the wrong answers, but he was the only guy who actually spoke
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's true.
[Guest]: And I think we were talking about this earlier about how a lot of this is a function of the
[Guest]: 1950s, which were an aberration in American history, because the rest of the world had
[Guest]: been devastated by World War II.
[Guest]: America was the only one that had the resources and was untouched.
[Guest]: So they just dominated all kinds of industries, including manufacturing.
[Guest]: So back then in the 50s, you could just finish high school, finish class 12, and then get
[Guest]: a job, which would give you a very comfortable upper middle class, upper middle class kind
[Guest]: of a lifestyle.
[Guest]: But what happened was in the late 60s and 70s, as the rest of the world started catching
[Guest]: up, it just made more economic sense to manufacture stuff overseas.
[Guest]: So these jobs started disappearing.
[Guest]: And there's the book by JD Vance called The Hillbilly Elegy, which also goes into this,
[Guest]: that it was more a function of that unusual period of prosperity in the 50s.
[Guest]: So it's because of that unusual period in the 50s that people are now assuming there's
[Guest]: a decline in small town America, and that's why they want to make America great again.
[Guest]: But it doesn't gel with the reality of economics and just how you get the most return on investment
[Guest]: on your capital.
[Guest]: And America, having won the Cold War for capitalism, is now seeing how capitalism works and a lot
[Guest]: of people are not liking it.
[Amit Varma]: So this disaffection, what is it a consequence of really?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think we both agree, and you're going to describe in detail why Trump's simplistic
[Amit Varma]: answers of immigration and outsourcing appear to have some sense to them and aren't exactly
[Amit Varma]: the truth.
[Amit Varma]: So what is this?
[Amit Varma]: And was this sort of decline of their dominance?
[Amit Varma]: Was it inevitable?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you spoke about the 50s, but the generation that voted for Trump today, probably wasn't
[Amit Varma]: alive then or doesn't remember the 50s.
[Amit Varma]: And the nostalgia for a period when America was great, when they talk about make America
[Amit Varma]: great again, was not the 50s, but I'd imagine the 70s or 80s.
[Amit Varma]: And what has changed since then is there's been a lot of globalization.
[Amit Varma]: And there's been a lot of, you know, America has become more and more a country of immigrants.
[Amit Varma]: And these are natural targets.
[Amit Varma]: But given that there is some decline, if it is a decline that has led to underemployment
[Amit Varma]: and not unemployment per se, what would you say are the causes of that decline?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think part of the reason is that the rest of the world is catching up.
[Guest]: So with India and China, you have like almost 3 billion people with a growing middle class,
[Guest]: growing infrastructure.
[Guest]: Similarly, you had Japan in the 70s, 80s, if you remember the original bugbear was Japan
[Guest]: in the 70s and 80s.
[Guest]: In fact, Trump in the 80s, when he was flirting with running for president was an extremely
[Guest]: anti-Japan guy, even though now he pals around with Shinzo Abe.
[Guest]: So I think part of it was inevitable.
[Guest]: I think it's just a natural progression of the global economy, and how capital or resources
[Guest]: get most efficiently allocated.
[Guest]: I think part of it was that.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go on to these two stories one by one.
[Amit Varma]: And the first story is immigration, where the story is, hey, Mexicans are coming over
[Amit Varma]: the border and taking away your jobs, and we really have to stop them.
[Amit Varma]: And we really need to send them back as many as we can.
[Amit Varma]: And then your jobs will be fine, which was, of course, an appealing narrative.
[Amit Varma]: What's your take on this?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I like to say that the anti-immigrant sentiment or the desire to pull up the ladder after
[Guest]: immigrating here is as American as apple pie and baseball.
[Guest]: In fact, it's even older.
[Guest]: So, for example, in the early days of the American Republic, Benjamin Franklin and others
[Guest]: wanted to control immigration from Germany.
[Guest]: They said that Germans are uneducated, uncouth people, and they will destroy our country,
[Guest]: take our jobs.
[Guest]: After that, it was the Catholics, the Irish, the Italians, the East Europeans.
[Guest]: So in the mid-1800s, there was actually a party called the Know Nothing Party, whose
[Guest]: entire platform was exactly what Trump and Bannon and all these guys are talking about
[Guest]: today, except today they're talking about Muslims and Asians and Mexicans.
[Guest]: And at that time, it was about the Irish and the Italians and Catholics, etc.
[Guest]: So part of it, I think Bill Bryson wrote in one of his books, that there has been this
[Guest]: continuous feeling that immigration until my generation and my parent generation was
[Guest]: amazing for America, and immigration after my generation is bad, and it's just destroying
[Guest]: the country.
[Guest]: So I think part of it was just a revival of that old trope.
[Guest]: What I find disheartening is that that trope had gone away for about three or four decades.
[Guest]: So if you remember, Ronald Reagan gave amnesty to a bunch of undocumented immigrants in the
[Guest]: 80s, working with Democrats and Republicans together.
[Guest]: John McCain, when he ran for president, was very honest about these jobs that we just
[Guest]: talked about.
[Guest]: He said, I'll tell you very honestly, these jobs are never coming back.
[Guest]: We just need to figure out what else to do, how to still keep our economy growing.
[Guest]: And the thing is, we as in America, were not ready for an adult telling us the simple truth
[Guest]: that those jobs aren't coming back.
[Guest]: So it's easy to then blame it on immigrants and NAFTA and trade deals and so on.
[Guest]: So you always want to find a scapegoat when you don't want to accept the truth.
[Amit Varma]: And this is almost a scapegoat that appeals to our instincts in the sense that I think
[Amit Varma]: this distrust of the other is something that is in a sense hardwired into us, which is
[Amit Varma]: why this narrative keeps popping up through the generations.
[Amit Varma]: So at some periods of time, like the last few decades, like you pointed out, it might
[Amit Varma]: be subdued in the political discourse, but it's always waiting to break out.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, the easiest thing to when things are not going well for you is always to blame
[Amit Varma]: somebody else, and if they are not your own people, quote unquote, then that kind of becomes
[Amit Varma]: easy.
[Amit Varma]: So would you say at some level, the anti-immigration rhetoric at its heart was driven more by this
[Amit Varma]: distrust of the other, rather than pure economic reasons, which were only a rationale for it?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And like you said, it's very basic human nature, this distrust of the other.
[Guest]: You see it in India as well.
[Guest]: So in Bombay, you have Shiv Sena that over the years has picked different others to bash
[Guest]: and then build their brand, and they keep going from stent to stent.
[Guest]: So I think a lot of it was that it's okay if immigrants come from Norway, for example,
[Guest]: that's what Trump said.
[Guest]: If somebody's ever been to Norway, I don't know why you would want to come to the US
[Guest]: from Norway.
[Guest]: But yeah, he's like, it's okay if we get somebody from Norway or Finland or Europe, but he doesn't
[Guest]: want people from what he calls the quote unquote, shithole countries, which ignores the very
[Guest]: basic fact of immigration, that any immigration is always going to be from a poorer place
[Guest]: to a richer place.
[Guest]: There is no reason why it should go in the opposite direction.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: Somebody from UP comes to Mumbai because UP is not doing as well, and Mumbai is doing
[Guest]: a lot better.
[Guest]: So that's just how immigration works.
[Guest]: And when you start fearing the other, you forget these basic facts about this is how
[Amit Varma]: things have been happening for years.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the points always made against immigration, what seems on the surface, what
[Amit Varma]: is sort of the seen effect and not the unseen effect is that, hey, immigrants come away
[Amit Varma]: and take jobs, and therefore locals don't have jobs.
[Guest]: What's the unseen part of this?
[Guest]: And so the unseen side of it is sort of the opposite of what they are saying when these
[Guest]: anti-immigrant people say that they are taking away our jobs.
[Guest]: The unseen side is immigrants usually do jobs that nobody else wants to do.
[Guest]: So there is the immigration crisis in America today, in my opinion, is the opposite of what
[Guest]: Trump and these guys are saying, because I think there is a labor shortfall, and people
[Guest]: who work in the high tech industry, as well as the lower end jobs like collecting fruit
[Guest]: and cleaning crabs, etc., there's a huge shortfall there.
[Guest]: So that's why the industry is worried about how the anti-immigration rhetoric is going
[Guest]: to affect the economy.
[Guest]: So the unseen side is that immigrants do jobs that nobody else wants to do, and they keep
[Guest]: the engine of the economy running.
[Guest]: If you stop them from coming, then you will push yourself into a different kind of recession
[Guest]: without realizing why that happened.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just to use a Bombay analogy, since we've both lived here for a while, and
[Amit Varma]: we first met here, in fact, is that if you think, you know, among a certain class of
[Amit Varma]: people is fashionable to talk against immigration or talk against slums for that matter.
[Amit Varma]: That's where immigrants first come when they enter the city, that's their entry point.
[Amit Varma]: And but the truth is, most of the middle class who might have buys at home or watchman for
[Amit Varma]: the building or drivers or whatever, where do you think they come from?
[Amit Varma]: Because the local supply cannot fulfill that demand.
[Amit Varma]: That is why there are people coming from poorer places like UP, as you pointed out, or Bihar,
[Amit Varma]: to take up those jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And because it's a positive sum game, that's a damn good thing, because everybody benefits
[Amit Varma]: and the extra value that their employers get are also ploughed back into the economy.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: I mean, if you did not have these immigrants coming in and doing these jobs, you would
[Guest]: essentially have to be paying more for the same stuff that you're paying for now.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, you want immigration to stop, but on the other hand, you still want
[Guest]: to pay, let's say $1 for an avocado in the US, which if the guest workers or immigrants
[Guest]: don't pick those avocados or transport them, then you'll have to pay $5 for an avocado
[Amit Varma]: instead of $1.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So, give me a sense of how the immigration debate is sort of playing out in the US.
[Guest]: Yeah, so, like I said, until Trump came along, immigration was one of those rare issues on
[Guest]: which there was, broadly speaking, bipartisan consensus, as in the moderate Republicans
[Guest]: and the Democrats, both saw immigration overall as a good thing.
[Guest]: The only disagreement was about what to do with what they call illegal immigrants or
[Guest]: undocumented immigrants.
[Guest]: So what exactly to do about them?
[Guest]: So for example, in the final days of the George W. Bush administration, there was this bipartisan
[Guest]: effort by Ted Kennedy and John McCain to push through immigration reform so that these people
[Guest]: who are undocumented can be taken care of and the number of high tech visas can be increased,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: It seemed like everything was going fine until Trump came and just upended the whole thing.
[Guest]: So in the last couple of years, I've seen much more anti-immigrant rhetoric.
[Guest]: In fact, just yesterday, a video went viral of this lawyer in midtown Manhattan, ranting
[Guest]: at women for speaking in Spanish saying that my taxes are paying for your welfare, which
[Guest]: by the way is factually incorrect.
[Guest]: But it's in that place where it's that age old anti-immigration sentiment is back.
[Guest]: Nobody's really talking about facts or nobody's talking about the real world consequences.
[Guest]: For example, I sent you a link about this story from Maryland where a huge part of the
[Guest]: economy depends on seafood like crabs and lobsters, oysters, etc.
[Guest]: And the labor force that cleans these crabs and makes them ready for consumption are all
[Guest]: guest workers from Mexico.
[Guest]: So for about two decades, they come during the season, they work on the docks cleaning
[Guest]: seafood, and then they go back very legally.
[Guest]: The Trump administration came and just changed that policy so that now the crab industry
[Guest]: in Maryland is suffering because there isn't enough immigrant labor.
[Guest]: So crab prices this summer will be through the roof.
[Unknown]: And what I found ironic in that story was one of the guys who's suffering was like,
[Guest]: oh, I'm still a Trump supporter.
[Guest]: I just hope he does something about my situation.
[Guest]: I think otherwise, he's right on immigration.
[Guest]: He just needs to take care of my crab business.
[Guest]: But I still support it.
[Guest]: It's kind of a not in my backyard kind of mentality right now when it comes to the anti-immigrant
[Amit Varma]: sentiment.
[Amit Varma]: Until it does come to your backyard, I mean, that's a great story.
[Amit Varma]: And it shows exactly the unseen effects of getting immigrants out of there.
[Amit Varma]: You've got the immigrants out of there.
[Amit Varma]: This means there'll be fewer crabs.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, crabs will be more expensive.
[Amit Varma]: Fewer people will get those crabs and the value that is not saved would have gone into
[Amit Varma]: something else.
[Amit Varma]: And you won't see that non-spending not happening because, hey, that's the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And you know what was earlier a positive sum game where everybody benefited has suddenly
[Amit Varma]: changed and become something else.
[Amit Varma]: And the essential truth about civilization that most people don't note is that immigrants
[Amit Varma]: build everything.
[Amit Varma]: All great cities have been built by immigrants in one fashion or the other.
[Amit Varma]: Later, you say, oh, they're not immigrants, they were always here.
[Amit Varma]: But at the start, everyone's an immigrant, great cities, great countries are all built
[Amit Varma]: by immigrants.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And if you look at the data, the funny thing is that the best local economies in the US,
[Guest]: the states and towns that are doing the best, economically speaking, have the lowest unemployment,
[Guest]: have the lowest crime, are all cities and states that have the maximum number of immigrants.
[Guest]: And the poorest socioeconomic indicators are all in states where there are hardly any immigrants.
[Guest]: It's all primarily a Caucasian population.
[Guest]: So that's the irony that if you look at the facts, the facts say that if you let in immigrants,
[Guest]: it will create more jobs, it will create more wealth, it will make everyone happy.
[Guest]: But somehow that sentiment just keeps coming back of blaming everything on them.
[Amit Varma]: And now that Trump has actually been in charge for a decent amount of time, is that sense
[Amit Varma]: changing or are people wedded to that narrative now, those who were when they elected him?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think those who were wedded to that narrative are still wedded to it.
[Guest]: Those who are opposed to it are even more opposed.
[Guest]: Like those who are pro-immigration people like me are even more convinced that these
[Guest]: policies are not great.
[Guest]: And one thing about Trump is that he's doing exactly what he said.
[Guest]: A lot of people thought, oh, this guy doesn't know anything.
[Guest]: He's a novice.
[Guest]: He's just a showman.
[Guest]: He'll go to the White House and then just chill.
[Guest]: He won't do anything.
[Guest]: But maybe because of its special interest groups and people who have influence over
[Guest]: him, he's actually carrying through on all the things he said, like the ban against immigration
[Guest]: from some Muslim countries, shutting down intake of refugees.
[Guest]: He actually put forth a plan in which he wanted to cut down legal immigration by about half.
[Guest]: So we're not even talking about the illegal hordes supposedly pouring over the border,
[Guest]: but legal immigrants like qualified engineers and doctors and all that, they want to cut
[Guest]: that down as well.
[Guest]: So something that has kept the American economy going, even after the decline of manufacturing,
[Guest]: they want to shut that down.
[Guest]: I think it's early enough that its broader impact has not been felt.
[Guest]: I think that's why people are still on board with him.
[Guest]: But I think as it starts having an impact on the economy, hopefully people will learn.
[Amit Varma]: No, and as with things with the economy, sometimes it's hard to even prove causation.
[Amit Varma]: For example, there might be various things going wrong in any case.
[Amit Varma]: And people will say, hey, this wasn't because of Trump's policies.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm intrigued by something you said a little earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to follow up on that, where you said that people assume that Trump would not
[Amit Varma]: carry out these kinds of policies, but maybe because there are interest groups and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: he has more or less gone down that path.
[Amit Varma]: What did you mean by the interest groups?
[Amit Varma]: Because I thought his anti-immigration rhetoric fits in with the rhetoric of a demagogue who's
[Amit Varma]: telling a simple story and appealing to people's worst instincts.
[Amit Varma]: But what are the interest groups that would want immigration to not happen?
[Guest]: Oh, so yeah, when I say interest groups, I'm not talking about like lobbying or businesses.
[Guest]: Saying there is this, you know, son of soil nativist movement that has managed to corner
[Guest]: the primaries markets, you know, like if you want to win the nomination of the Republican
[Guest]: Party, you essentially need to only convince, let's say about 10% of the electorate, which
[Guest]: is very passionate to come out and vote for you, because most people don't vote in primaries.
[Guest]: Most people don't vote in general.
[Guest]: So that interest group, which is focused on this particular policy of being against immigration,
[Guest]: being against foreign trade, pushing through this idea of white ethno-nationalistic state.
[Guest]: So all these things, those are the interest groups I'm talking about.
[Guest]: So not lobbying or business interest groups.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I got it.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a little scary because then it means that these radical fringes have a disproportionate
[Amit Varma]: influence on the party because they may be small in number, but one, because they are
[Amit Varma]: much louder, they've got Trump's attention and they seem to be more of them than they
[Amit Varma]: are.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, because they influence the primaries in the way that you mentioned that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they just have to get the passionate people and people on the fringes are always more
[Amit Varma]: passionate to come out and vote.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore they are reshaping the whole Republican Party, despite being just a fraction
[Amit Varma]: of the party.
[Guest]: And that changes the entire political landscape.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And that's what has been happening for the last couple of years.
[Guest]: You know, that election in Alabama, where there was this guy who was accused of being
[Amit Varma]: a pedophile.
[Amit Varma]: Roy Moore.
[Unknown]: Roy Moore, right.
[Guest]: And first the party said, okay, we are not going to support him.
[Guest]: Trump also said that, no, you should step down and let somebody else run instead.
[Guest]: But once these, again, what I call interest groups or the alt-right or whatever you would
[Guest]: like to call it, they still kept hammering that, no, he's our guy.
[Guest]: And then the Republican Party came back and rallied around him.
[Guest]: He's still lost, fortunately.
[Guest]: But that was very telling that they first ran away from him and then they ran back towards
[Guest]: him despite all these horrible things that he said and done.
[Amit Varma]: Gaurav, before we move on, let me just go back to one of the objections which various
[Amit Varma]: people raise against immigration and which you alluded to.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Milton Friedman also raised it, though I disagree with it, which is a welfare
[Amit Varma]: argument where they say that, look, a free immigration and open borders are all okay
[Amit Varma]: in a country which is a completely free society and with free markets and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But if you are a welfare state, which the U.S. is to some extent, then you have tax
[Amit Varma]: dollars going in to support immigrants who are there illegally.
[Amit Varma]: What would you say about this?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And it's a sentiment or idea that I also agree with.
[Guest]: So I would not like it if my tax dollars were going to fund some immigrants' welfare.
[Guest]: The only problem with that, at least in the U.S. context, is the U.S. welfare state is
[Guest]: much more carefully crafted than, let's say, Western European welfare states.
[Guest]: So according to the law, you cannot get welfare if you are an immigrant.
[Guest]: Forget being an illegal immigrant, even if you're a legal immigrant.
[Guest]: So for example, my wife's parents came here about 30 years ago.
[Guest]: And for the first 10 years or so, by law, they did not really qualify for Medicare or
[Guest]: Social Security.
[Guest]: In fact, anybody who's working even today in the U.S. as an immigrant on, let's say,
[Guest]: H-1B is paying for Social Security taxes, but they won't get the benefits from them
[Guest]: because the laws and regulations and control mechanisms in place stop that from happening.
[Guest]: And most people don't realize that.
[Guest]: Most people just buy into this simplistic narrative that immigrants come and get welfare.
[Guest]: It's controlled a lot.
[Guest]: And then the second part of it is they do pay taxes.
[Guest]: I think we've talked about this in the past on other forums, that even illegal immigrants
[Guest]: are paying taxes.
[Guest]: Even if they're not paying income taxes, they're paying sales taxes.
[Guest]: So if they get some basic services, like for example, public schooling, it's not exactly
[Guest]: welfare that they are getting, they're just getting the services that they are indirectly
[Amit Varma]: paying for.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And on the whole, people are putting in much more than they get, which I think is inevitable
[Amit Varma]: in anyone's relationship with the state.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, people who make this argument, I think, make the same fallacy as those people who
[Amit Varma]: say that overpopulation is a bad thing, where they look at people as a burden and not as
[Amit Varma]: a resource, you know, and I would just cite Julian Simon here and say that people are
[Amit Varma]: quote, the ultimate resource unquote, and that every individual always puts in more
[Amit Varma]: than he takes out.
[Amit Varma]: And this is especially in relation with the state where illegal immigrants are paying
[Amit Varma]: all kinds of taxes, because they are consuming all kinds of things, and there are sales taxes
[Amit Varma]: with everything.
[Amit Varma]: And, and like you said, and so I don't think that, you know, that it's a case that this
[Amit Varma]: argument doesn't apply to the US because of the way the system is structured.
[Amit Varma]: I think this argument doesn't apply anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Human beings are a resource, if there are more people and greater economic networks,
[Amit Varma]: everybody benefits.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So at a broader level, that point is very true.
[Guest]: But I was just saying that additionally, in the US, there are rules that specifically
[Guest]: stop you from getting welfare if you're an immigrant.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: American politics is incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll do a separate show with you at some point.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on sort of to the second part of Trump's story about jobs, which is protectionism.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, him being a protectionist, but which is outsourcing, whereas the narrative he tried
[Amit Varma]: to sell was that, hey, you guys are losing your jobs, there aren't enough good jobs in
[Amit Varma]: America because they're being outsourced.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact of the matter is that some of the decline in these jobs is because of globalization,
[Amit Varma]: which we all know is a really good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It's again, a positive some game.
[Amit Varma]: But the nativist arguments would be that no, it's not because we are losing these jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And what do I care about people in China or India or Philippines or wherever?
[Amit Varma]: What's your take on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And this is, again, something that has been around since maybe at least the 70s or 80s,
[Guest]: when the Japanese economy started improving.
[Guest]: So America used to dominate the auto industry, for example, we are the biggest market for
[Guest]: cars and also the biggest producers.
[Guest]: And then Japan rebuilt after World War Two, and then Toyota and Honda started doing well.
[Guest]: Then in Korea, and then you have China and India also doing well.
[Guest]: So as a result, you have some jobs, which once you could take for granted in the US,
[Guest]: being done by people overseas, because it just makes it simple dollars and cents.
[Guest]: It makes sense that you want to lower your costs.
[Guest]: And neck and neck that benefits everyone, like if you are able to manufacture a product
[Guest]: for cheaper somewhere else, then that creates extra capital that can then create other industries
[Guest]: or that can create other businesses.
[Guest]: So that's like economics 101.
[Guest]: But again, it's protectionism is similar to the anti-immigrant sentiment right tight to
[Guest]: this hate of the other or the foreign.
[Guest]: And yeah, that's why those two have gone hand in hand in the last couple of years.
[Amit Varma]: And the scene effect from the point of view of say, a worker in small town America is
[Amit Varma]: that you know, these jobs are being shipped overseas because they're cheaper for the evil
[Amit Varma]: capitalist entity that is shipping them overseas and we are suffering, we don't have jobs.
[Amit Varma]: But the unseen effect always is that they bring greater value to the consumers who are
[Amit Varma]: here as well, the company shipping them abroad are saving money and perhaps not shutting
[Amit Varma]: down because they were able to save that money.
[Amit Varma]: But value is brought back into the economy and consumers get cheaper goods because of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So if you buy a good today for $10, which would otherwise be $12, if it was for, you
[Amit Varma]: know, done by local jobs, you might not buy it at all.
[Amit Varma]: Or if you do your saving that $2 and a $2 in value, which is created by the saving goes
[Amit Varma]: back into the economy and create jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a positive some game.
[Amit Varma]: And unfortunately, here again, people often tend to have, you know, they don't put the
[Amit Varma]: consumer at the center of this market process.
[Amit Varma]: They look at other elements of it.
[Amit Varma]: But the consumer should always be at the center and the value that he is saving, which goes
[Amit Varma]: back into the economy.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And most people don't get this, we've had until recently, we had leaders who talked
[Guest]: about this, that trade is good and NAFTA is good.
[Guest]: So we had Bill Clinton, then after that you had George Bush, the last two guys who ran
[Guest]: for president, John and lost John McCain and Mitt Romney were also on board with trade
[Guest]: like they, they were the adults in the room who were telling the electorate that no trade
[Guest]: is good.
[Guest]: And you know, this is how the economy grows.
[Guest]: You know, they fought an entire Cold War for this after all and have created this world
[Guest]: order of the free market economy and foreign trade and everybody has benefited from it.
[Guest]: But suddenly we have this pushback from people who don't see that the benefits outweigh the
[Guest]: supposed costs.
[Guest]: And this, you know, what you said about putting the consumer front and center, I find that
[Guest]: interesting because there's this show I like called South Park, which has, which takes
[Guest]: on a lot of social issues, often from a libertarian angle.
[Guest]: And then this episode about the hate for Walmart, like everybody hates Walmart because Walmart
[Guest]: comes in and it destroys the local economy.
[Guest]: That is the narrative.
[Guest]: So in that episode, they go and they try to kill Walmart and then they find out the heart
[Guest]: of Walmart, it's a mirror, like that is the point they are making that Walmart does well
[Guest]: because of you, because you, the consumer wants the cheapest goods and that helps everyone.
[Guest]: That's why Walmart is doing well.
[Guest]: That's why NAFTA is good, that's why foreign trade is good, but we don't realize that it's
[Amit Varma]: a mirror at the heart of all this entire machine.
[Amit Varma]: And we are the economy, the choices that we make give the economy its direction.
[Amit Varma]: What you said about, you know, again, politics is very interesting because just going back
[Amit Varma]: to that, the Republicans have been the ones who are always for trade.
[Amit Varma]: The anti free trade voices, which were earlier just lone voices, so to say, came from the
[Amit Varma]: far left of the Democratic Party.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, I think Bernie Sanders views about trade are very similar to Trump's.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, trade and also some aspects of immigration.
[Guest]: So he's not exactly a pro immigration guy as well.
[Guest]: He makes the right noises.
[Guest]: And all my left wing friends hate it, and especially my Bernie fan friends hate it when
[Guest]: I say this.
[Guest]: I think there's more that Bernie Sanders and Trump have in common than you would think.
[Guest]: They always hate somebody saying that, but yeah, on immigration, on trade, things like
[Guest]: these, they are, it's very difficult to tell the two apart, just that one guy is a lot
[Guest]: more boorish and vulgar, and the other guy is much more, you know, affable, nicer, affable
[Guest]: and charming, but at its core, they have the same ideas on these, on these issues.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and partly because the populist ideas are simple stories.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, therein lies their appeal.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you'd earlier said about immigration, that even though people thought about Trump
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, he's going to chill out in the White House, in your words, and not really
[Amit Varma]: bother about these, he's actually moved forward with his anti immigration policies.
[Amit Varma]: But with protectionism, one would think it's the other way around, because at the end of
[Amit Varma]: the day, it pretty much every corporate interest group would look to its own interests and
[Amit Varma]: their interests lie in outsourcing.
[Amit Varma]: So they would not let Trump do anything that harms him.
[Amit Varma]: So how is that going in terms of protectionism?
[Amit Varma]: Has he been able to implement anything we should be worried about?
[Guest]: Protectionism he hasn't so far, but he wants to.
[Guest]: Now, protectionism is this one weird thing that he's been obsessed with for 40 years.
[Guest]: So I don't think he has too many principles, but this is one principle he holds very dear
[Amit Varma]: to his heart.
[Amit Varma]: I guess because from a zero sum view of the world, it just makes sense that if others
[Amit Varma]: are winning, we must be losing.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: And because he's not a typical politician, I don't think he cares about the legacy.
[Guest]: I don't think he cares about the party.
[Guest]: He just wants to do what he thinks is right.
[Guest]: So like, there's no leverage that businesses have over him other than maybe hoping that
[Guest]: Congress legislatively stops him.
[Guest]: But he has been talking about like, NAFTA, he wants to renegotiate NAFTA, he pulled out
[Guest]: of the Trans Pacific Partnership, which was a bad deal, which by the way, everybody else
[Guest]: was also agreed on, even though it's a good deal for the US economy, but they pulled out
[Guest]: of it and the drumbeat against it was so intense that even Hillary Clinton, who at one point
[Guest]: supported the deal, decided that it was politically expedient to say that yes, yes, we should
[Guest]: pull out of that Trans Pacific Partnership, which was essentially a deal that would give
[Guest]: US the access to these East Asian markets at lower tariffs that they right now don't
[Guest]: have access to.
[Guest]: Those countries already have access to the US market.
[Guest]: So there was literally the US was the one that was benefiting the most from that deal.
[Guest]: But the simplistic anti-trade and protectionist rhetoric is so easy to sell that they pulled
[Guest]: out of it.
[Amit Varma]: So I think that is one thing he did on day one that has hurt the economy.
[Amit Varma]: But you're saying any of the other guys would also have done that because it was politically
[Amit Varma]: expedient and because that that was a popular decision to make?
[Guest]: Might have done that for sure.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I think sometimes politicians will say something but not follow through on it.
[Guest]: I think Hillary Clinton might have stayed in it, you know, in the Clintonian way of
[Guest]: trying to have your cake and eat it too.
[Guest]: I think she might have stayed in the deal, even though during the campaign, she said
[Guest]: that we should leave it because she was Secretary of State when it was being negotiated.
[Guest]: So she knows how useful it was.
[Guest]: Her husband crafted NAFTA, which is the North American Free Trade Agreement.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I think she would have found a way to maybe stay in it.
[Guest]: There's no way to tell for sure.
[Guest]: But yeah, Trump doesn't really care about these things.
[Amit Varma]: So he pulled out.
[Amit Varma]: So my question is, with the things that Trump is doing on immigration and protectionism
[Amit Varma]: and both of us are really on the same page, we agree that these policies are harmful.
[Amit Varma]: So my question is, what kind of effects will they have?
[Amit Varma]: How harmful is it?
[Amit Varma]: And supposing the next president disagrees with Trump on all of these things, can they
[Amit Varma]: be easily reversed, or are we causing irreversible damage, which will harm us?
[Amit Varma]: And I don't need to specify what I mean by us, because I think all our economic fates
[Amit Varma]: are in a way tied together.
[Amit Varma]: So if the US economy suffers in some way, the effects of that are felt everywhere.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I alternately feel optimistic and pessimistic on this.
[Guest]: But I think sometimes I feel we have entered globally this phase of anti-immigrant sentiment
[Guest]: of protectionism, where everybody is now just going to put up walls and undo all the work
[Guest]: of the last few decades.
[Guest]: And sometimes I feel that Trump is just an aberration.
[Guest]: He is literally the only guy at the top, like at least amongst politicians who believes
[Guest]: in this.
[Guest]: So once he moves on, let's say even Mike Pence is not exactly a protectionist, or he's not
[Guest]: as much of an anti-immigration guy, neither is the Republican leadership in Congress.
[Guest]: So I'm hoping that once Trump goes away, things will slowly return to normal.
[Amit Varma]: But like I said, I alternate between optimism and pessimism.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the other argument is that, look, Trump got to the top because he got something
[Amit Varma]: in the culture, he appealed to something in the culture, and that includes these nativist
[Amit Varma]: instincts and this anti-immigration and anti-outsourcing feeling.
[Amit Varma]: So even if Trump himself goes, once those ideas and those sentiments are there in the
[Amit Varma]: culture, somebody else will come along to cater to them.
[Guest]: Yeah, true.
[Guest]: And it's very likely that that can happen.
[Guest]: And in this instance, I'm hoping that special interest groups from business side are able
[Guest]: to prevail.
[Guest]: It's like one of those rare sides when I'm hoping the lobbies win.
[Amit Varma]: Right, because their interest appears to coincide with ours for this one.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Because there are some things you have to do that are much more complex for your economy
[Guest]: or for your country to do well, which are not always easy to sell in a soundbite or
[Guest]: in a tweet.
[Guest]: But as long as enough people at the top are on board with it, you know, hopefully things
[Guest]: will go back to the way they were.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to ask you a tough question here for which it's unfair of me to ask you this
[Amit Varma]: because I myself don't have any answers.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, I don't have the depth of knowledge that you do.
[Amit Varma]: We both agreed that these two answers that Trump offered to the decline in jobs or the
[Amit Varma]: underemployment crisis, as it were, are wrong answers that immigration is hugely beneficial
[Amit Varma]: for an economy in many, many unseen ways in some seen ways and globalization is good on
[Amit Varma]: the whole and the American people themselves benefit from it.
[Amit Varma]: But so my tough question to you is that if you are in Trump's place and you have to craft
[Amit Varma]: an answer for those people in middle America saying that, you know, why don't I have jobs
[Amit Varma]: as good as my parents did?
[Amit Varma]: What is your sort of I mean, I know it's a very complex question, and it's a multifactorial
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: But broadly, what is it that a politician can say in such a situation, which is the
[Amit Varma]: truth and not just, you know, the sort of stories that Trump was telling?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that's what John McCain tried to do.
[Guest]: And I think Mitt Romney as well, where they said that, listen, this is the reality live
[Guest]: in a global economy, and those jobs are not coming back, but we have better jobs and better
[Guest]: industries today.
[Guest]: I guess it's always much better to be a knowledge based or service based economy than a manufacturing
[Guest]: based economy.
[Guest]: It just makes logical sense.
[Guest]: So we've had politicians sell that in the past.
[Amit Varma]: And it doesn't do it in an arithmetic way.
[Amit Varma]: Right, right.
[Amit Varma]: And those ideas don't sell.
[Amit Varma]: And have adults in the room actually come to power saying those kind of adult things?
[Guest]: Yeah, in the sense that you had Bill Clinton, who, who crafted NAFTA.
[Guest]: So he was this, he was the centrist Democrat, right before Bill Clinton, and all the other
[Guest]: leaders of the Democratic Party were much more leftist.
[Guest]: Bill Clinton came and ruled in a much more centrist way.
[Amit Varma]: Part of it was because of Newt Gingrich and the Republican Congress, but did he campaign
[Amit Varma]: as a centrist?
[Amit Varma]: Or did he govern as a centrist?
[Guest]: They're very different things.
[Guest]: He did campaign as a centrist as well, I believe, especially in his re-election, for sure.
[Guest]: But I think even his rise in the early 90s, or 91 or 92, was running as a centrist, saying
[Guest]: that we need to move beyond the days of socialist Democrats, which he did successfully.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Gaurav, normally, I end my episodes by asking my guests, you know, what are they hopeful
[Amit Varma]: about?
[Amit Varma]: And what are they fearful about?
[Amit Varma]: But you've already, I think, sort of answered that question, let me kind of paraphrase what
[Amit Varma]: you said.
[Amit Varma]: And if you have something to add to that, and what you're fearful of, is that people
[Amit Varma]: are building walls across the world, there is an anti-immigration sentiment, there is
[Amit Varma]: a protectionist sentiment, not just in the US, but elsewhere, especially where authoritarian
[Amit Varma]: figures have taken over in the US, in Hungary, in Turkey, even in India, and you're worried
[Amit Varma]: that we might all be shutting ourselves off and becoming more insular, which would have
[Amit Varma]: seemed unthinkable 10 years ago, when globalization seems so inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're hopeful about is that, hey, it's only Trump right now in the American
[Amit Varma]: system.
[Amit Varma]: There's no one else who really feels like this.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an accident of history.
[Amit Varma]: Is there something you'd like to add to these?
[Amit Varma]: Or have I managed to paraphrase you accurately?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, I think that pretty much paraphrases it.
[Guest]: And one more thing I'm optimistic about is that the US political system is designed with
[Guest]: checks and balances and opportunities to course-correct.
[Guest]: So unlike in India, where once you get into power, you have a lot more structural advantage
[Guest]: to keep perpetuating that power, in the US, it's easier to course-correct, relatively
[Guest]: speaking.
[Guest]: So I'm hopeful that in November, the Democrats will take back at least one house of the Congress
[Guest]: and then act like a check against Trump's anti-immigrant and anti-trade policies.
[Amit Varma]: Your point on how it's relatively easier in the US to course-correct is a hopeful note
[Amit Varma]: for you, because you're in New York, but not so hopeful for me, because I'm in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: Gaurav, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: It should have happened long ago, and I hope it keeps happening in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks again.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: It was great to be on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, then go to sceneunseen.in, the homepage of
[Amit Varma]: the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I have done previous episodes on immigration with Shikha Sodh Dalmia and on protectionism
[Amit Varma]: with Anupam Manoor.
[Amit Varma]: Do look for those.
[Amit Varma]: In those episodes, we went into the philosophical and economic arguments against restricting
[Amit Varma]: immigration, that is for immigration, and against protectionism, that is for free trade,
[Amit Varma]: in quite a lot of detail.
[Amit Varma]: Today we spoke more in the American context of what Trump has done.
[Amit Varma]: So check those episodes out.
[Amit Varma]: Also, if you enjoyed listening to Gaurav, you should follow him on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: He is at Gaurav Sabnis, at Gaurav Sabnis, one word.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for listening.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the Scene and the Unseen, check out another hit show from
[Amit Varma]: Indusworks Media Network's Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: Brocha.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: There she stands, a podcast addict, outside the bank, having travelled several miles to
[Unknown]: get in with other poor souls like her.
[Unknown]: The journey, though daunting for this youngling, will have some comfort because she has downloaded
[Unknown]: her favourite podcast.
[Unknown]: You can see more of her species on IVMPodcasts.com, your one-stop destination where you can check
[Unknown]: out the coolest Indian podcasts.